Title: Composition and rendering of BharataNatyam Performance in Augmented Reality

The Problem Statement :
Bharatanatyam is a highly coded and structured form of classical dance. The codification, sourced from BharataMuni's Natyasastra, is in the form of categorization of stances, 
movements and enactment, with unambiguous physical descriptions and descriptive names. The uncertainty or variation in actual performances (due to variations in physical 
conditions of the performer and the environment) are covered by the experiential, demonstrative, non-descriptive part. Like, the half-squat is supposed to give a sense of the 
dancer being reduced to half her natural height; however, how much is that dancer's half, is completely dependent on the conditions. The recommendation is not numerical or 
even purely geometric for this. It is in the form of relative movement, positioning, and sustainability (stability, lack of stress, limits of strength and stretch) for the 
particular dancer in a particular environment.


Because of the codified nature, Bharatanatyam has gained attention as a potential target for computational modelling and automation (of choreography and similar task-
aspects). A sustained effort of this kind in Goa University has accomplished codification and rudimentary animation of the basic stances and elementary movements called 
adavus. However, because of the non-symbolic, performative aspects, the individual and conditional variations, straight geometric-numeric coding is just an elementary step 
and much needs to be covered towards potential automation.

For this, machine learning from videos and stills of performances (supervised by expert ratings) was proposed. However, lack of expert support (rating videos takes huge time) 
has stymied that effort.

Therefore, a middle-path is being proposed here. We will use the codification and animation accomplished so far to create an augmented reality type animation of a real 
dancer's figure performing codified movements like a program. For this, physical characteristics (structural as well as dynamic, behavioural) of the dancer (and of human body 
in general on average) need to be modelled functionally, like a robot's inverse kinematics. Currently, this will be the task the project is about.

Abstract:
BharataNatyam (BN) is a well-documented and codified form of classical dance. The documentation available includes prescriptions and descriptions of stances, movements and 
enactments. However, learning and teaching BN is more via performative demonstrations than the written texts. The available codification and texts encourage digitization and 
suggest automation of teaching, learning and choreography of BN. A few projects with this motivation have been conceived and passed the proof-of-concept stage. But the pall-
bearers of the tradition, the BN gurus, are neither conversant nor warmed up to these exciting possibilities stemming from digitization. The main hurdle is lack of a critical 
mass of examples that can help them visualise the potential in concrete form. Recently completed research projects demonstrate both these realities: the exciting potential 
and the dampening lack of enthusiasm among the practitioners. To bridge the gap and to bring the exponents on board, to achieve the critical mass, this current project 
proposal is conceived of in the last 3 years. It is an extension of the elementary animation that was demonstrated as a proof of a concept on the sidelines of a recently 
completed thesis (Goa University, 2018) that is the root of the current project.


The central idea is to take original short videos and snapshots of a performing BN exponent and then build an authoring system for creating augmented reality animations that 
emulate performances of the same person. The animations are to be based on a 30-bit vector representation devised and used in the thesis mentioned above. The challenge is to 
render the animations based on BN coding that is not numerical or geometric but descriptive and topological. For example, the "half-squat" pose is not exactly "0.5 height" of 
the dancer or does not necessarily mean the knees bend at a 90 degree angle, but instead it depends on the dancer's physique and body type. In the famous Natraja pose, only 
relative positions of limbs are known and the angles depend on the basic need of achieving stability and balance.

If such an authoring system goes operational, it cab become a platform for building the critical mass of datasets and expert involvement to take BN research and automation to 
the next level.
